Parsing vs execution (#7637)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute.md

```

</File>

## Parsing vs execution

Parsing in Jinja is when dbt:

- Reads your project files.
- Identifies [`ref`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/ref) and [`source`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/source).
- Identifies macro definitions.
- Builds the dependency graph (DAG).

It doesn't run any SQL &mdash; `execute == False`.

Execution is when dbt actually runs SQL and builds models &mdash; `execute == True`.

During execution:

- dbt renders full Jinja templates into SQL.
- Resolves all instances of `ref()` and `source()` to their corresponding table or view names.
- Runs the SQL in your models like, ([`dbt run`](/reference/commands/run)), tests ([`dbt test`](/reference/commands/test)), [seeds](/reference/seed-properties), or [snapshots](/reference/snapshot-properties).
- Creates or updates tables/views in the warehouse.
- Applies any materializations (incremental, table, view, ephemeral).

> `execute` impacts the values of `ref()` and `source`, and won't work as expected inside of a [`sql_header`](/reference/resource-configs/sql_header#usage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`execute` impacts the values of `ref()` and `source()`, and won't work as expected inside of a [`sql_header`](/reference/resource-configs/sql_header#usage).
```

- Creates or updates tables/views in the warehouse.
- Applies any materializations (incremental, table, view, ephemeral).

`execute` impacts the values of `ref()` and `source()`, and won't work as expected inside of a [`sql_header`](/reference/resource-configs/sql_header#usage).

This is because in the initial parse of the project, dbt identifies every use of `ref()` and `source()` to build the DAG, but doesn’t resolve them to actual database identifiers. Instead, it replaces each with a placeholder value to ensure the SQL compiles cleanly during parsing.

Additionally, macros like [`log()`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/log) and [`exceptions.warn()`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/exceptions#warn) are still evaluated at parse time, during dbt's "first-pass" Jinja render to extract `ref`, `source` and `config`. As a result, dbt will also run any logging or warning messages during this process.

Even though nothing is being executed yet, dbt still runs those log lines while parsing which may cause some confusion &mdash; it looks like dbt is doing something real but it’s just parsing.

> ### Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples

### Logging fully-qualified relation names
```

```

</File>

## Parsing vs execution

Parsing in Jinja is when dbt:

- Reads your project files.
- Identifies [`ref`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/ref) and [`source`](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/source).
- Identifies macro definitions.
- Builds the dependency graph (DAG).

It doesn't run any SQL &mdash; `execute == False`.

Execution is when dbt actually runs SQL and builds models &mdash; `execute == True`.

> During execution:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During execution, dbt:
```

> - dbt renders full Jinja templates into SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Renders full Jinja templates into SQL.
```

- Resolves all instances of `ref()` and `source()` to their corresponding table or view names.

> - Runs the SQL in your models like, ([`dbt run`](/reference/commands/run)), tests ([`dbt test`](/reference/commands/test)), [seeds](/reference/seed-properties), or [snapshots](/reference/snapshot-properties).

Reviewer 2: Suggesting this revision to make it clearer:
```suggestion
- Runs the SQL in your models during commands like ([`dbt run`](/reference/commands/run)), ([`dbt test`](/reference/commands/test)), [`dbt seed`](/reference/commands/seed, or [`dbt snapshot`](/reference/commands/snapshot).
```
Should we also change the links to seed and snapshot to /reference/commands/seed and /reference/commands/snapshot?

```
$ dbt run
15:42:01  Running with dbt=1.10.2
15:42:01  I'm running a query now.  <------ this one is misleading!!!! no query is actually being run
15:42:01  Found 1 model, 0 tests, 0 snapshots, 0 macros, 0 operations, 0 seed files, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics
15:42:01
15:42:01  Concurrency: 8 threads (target='dev')
15:42:01
15:42:01  1 of 1 START table model analytics.my_model .................................. [RUN]
15:42:01  I'm running a query now
15:42:02  1 of 1 OK created table model analytics.my_model ............................. [OK in 0.36s]
```

### Logging fully-qualified relation names

Let's assume you have a relation named `relation` obtained using something like `{% set relation = ref('my_model') %}` or `{% set relation = source('source_name', 'table_name') %}` &mdash; this will lead to unexpected or confusing behavior during parsing:

```jinja

{%- if load_relation(relation) is none -%}
    {{ log("Relation is missing: " ~ relation, True) }}
{% endif %}

```

To prevent this, add the `execute` flag to make sure the check only runs when dbt is actually running the code &mdash; not just when it's preparing it.

> Use the command, `do exceptions.warn` to emit a warning during model execution without failing the run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the command `do exceptions.warn` to emit a warning during model execution without failing the run.
```
